NativeAOT deployment (#2579)
dotnet/docs-maui: docs/deployment/nativeaot.md

---
title: "Native AOT deployment on iOS and Mac Catalyst"

> description: "Learn how to reduce your app size and achieve faster startup time with NativeAOT deployment on iOS and Mac Catalyst."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to reduce your app size and achieve faster startup time with native AOT deployment on iOS and Mac Catalyst."
```

ms.date: 10/24/2024
monikerRange: ">=net-maui-9.0"
---

# Native AOT deployment on iOS and Mac Catalyst

> Native ahead-of-time (AOT) deployment produces a .NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET MAUI) app on iOS and Mac Catalyst that's been ahead-of-time compiled to native code. Native AOT performs static program analysis, full trimming of your app, which is aggressive in removing code that's not AOT compatible, and ahead-of-time code generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native ahead-of-time (AOT) deployment produces a .NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET MAUI) app on iOS and Mac Catalyst that's been ahead-of-time compiled to native code. Native AOT performs static program analysis, full trimming of your app, which is aggressive in removing code that's not statically referenced, and ahead-of-time code generation.
```

Publishing and deploying a Native AOT app produces the following benefits:

- Reduced app package size.
- Faster startup time.
- Faster build time.

Native AOT will introduce limitations on usage of certain aspects of the .NET runtime, and should only be used in scenarios where app size and performance are important. It'll require you to adapt your apps to Native AOT requirements, which means ensuring that they are fully trimming and AOT compatible. For more information about Native AOT limitations, see [Native AOT limitations](#native-aot-limitations).

> When Native AOT deployment is enabled, the build system analyzes your code, and all its dependencies, to verify if it's suitable for full trimming and AOT compilation. If incompatibilities are detected, trimming and AOT warnings are produced. A single trimming or AOT warning means that the app isn't compatible with Native AOT deployment, and that it might not work correctly. Therefore, when building an app for Native AOT deployment you should review and correct all trimming and AOT warnings. Failure to do this will result in any AOT incompatible constructs in your app being removed at build time, which can result in crashes at runtime. It's therefore important to test an app thoroughly when moving to the Native AOT deployment model. The AOT deployed app must be tested to verify that functionality hasn't changed from the untrimmed app. For more information, see [Introduction to trim warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/trimming/fixing-warnings) and [Introduction to AOT warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/fixing-warnings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Native AOT deployment is enabled, the build system analyzes your code, and all its dependencies, to verify if it's suitable for full trimming and AOT compilation. If incompatibilities are detected, trimming and AOT warnings are produced. A single trimming or AOT warning means that the app isn't compatible with Native AOT deployment, and that it might not work correctly. Therefore, when building an app for Native AOT deployment you should review and correct all trimming and AOT warnings. Failure to do this may result in exceptions at runtime since necessary code could have been removed. Should you suppress the warnings, the AOT deployed app must be thoroughly tested to verify that functionality hasn't changed from the untrimmed app. For more information, see [Introduction to trim warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/trimming/fixing-warnings) and [Introduction to AOT warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/fixing-warnings).
```

> [!NOTE]

> > There may be cases where fixing trimming and AOT warnings isn't possible, such as when they occur for third-party libraries.

Author: What do we recommend users do in this scenario?

Reviewer 2: I think in such case the user must contact the developer of the library and report the issue.

:::image type="content" source="media/nativeaot/app-package-size.png" alt-text="Chart showing app package size across different deployment models." border="false":::

The preceding chart shows that Native AOT produces more than 2x smaller apps for both iOS and Mac Catalyst compared to the default deployment model.

The following chart shows the average startup time for a `dotnet new maui` app on iOS and Mac Catalyst on Mono and Native AOT deployment:

:::image type="content" source="media/nativeaot/average-startup-time.png" alt-text="Chart showing average app startup time on Mono and Native AOT." border="false":::

The preceding chart shows that Native AOT has up to 2x faster startup times on iOS devices and 1.2x faster startup time on Mac Catalyst, compared to Mono deployment.

The following chart shows the average build time for a `dotnet new maui` app on iOS and Mac Catalyst across different deployment models:

:::image type="content" source="media/nativeaot/average-build-time.png" alt-text="Chart showing average app build time on Mono and Native AOT." border="false":::

> The preceding chart shows that Native AOT has up to 2.8x faster build times on iOS devices compared to the default deployment model. For Mac Catalyst, build times are comparable for arm64 single RID apps, but are slightly slower for universal apps when compared to Mono deployment.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if these graphs should end up in the official documentation (or in this form). They were measured with RC1 release and numbers will most probably change if we compare them against GA (and future servicing releases). So with that, would be good to avoid someone taking them for granted. 

Maybe we could add a sentence which would clarify this, if we decide to keep the graphs/numbers in our official docs, something like: "Our preliminary .NET 9 performance testing is showing the following results... which are presented here to give an idea of achievable performance improvements with Native AOT deployment model"

@MichalStrehovsky @simonrozsival what do you think?

Reviewer: I don't have a strong opinion either way. ASP.NET does have similar graph: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/native-aot?view=aspnetcore-8.0#why-use-native-aot-with-aspnet-core. It will get stale, but the ballpark will probably be the same for a long time.

Reviewer 3: Thanks! @davidbritch already added a note about it here: https://github.com/dotnet/docs-maui/pull/2579/files#diff-3d87ee068ce7c17f2f37fffcaf5bae0c6654b39221f7673172d8c55d3aba2dd8R30

So I think we are good to go.

## Publish using Native AOT

The Native AOT deployment model is enabled with the `$(PublishAot)` build property, and the `dotnet publish` command. The following example shows how to modify a project file to enable Native AOT deployment on iOS and Mac Catalyst:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <!-- enable trimming and AOT analyzers on all platforms -->
  <IsAotCompatible>true</IsAotCompatible>

  <!-- select platforms to use with NativeAOT -->
  <PublishAot Condition="$([MSBuild]::GetTargetPlatformIdentifier('$(TargetFramework)')) == 'ios'">true</PublishAot>
  <PublishAot Condition="$([MSBuild]::GetTargetPlatformIdentifier('$(TargetFramework)')) == 'maccatalyst'">true</PublishAot>
</PropertyGroup>
```

Setting the `$(IsAotCompatible)` build property to `true`, for all platforms, enables trimming and AOT analyzers. These analyzers help you identify code that's not compatible with trimming or AOT.

Conditionally setting `$(PublishAot)` to `true`, for iOS and Mac Catalyst, enables dynamic code usage analysis during build and Native AOT compilation during publish. Native AOT analysis includes all of the app's code and any libraries the app depends on.

> [!WARNING]

> > The `$(PublishAot)` build property shouldn't be conditioned by build configuration. This is because trimming features switches are enabled or disabled based on the value of the `$(PublishAot)` build property, and the same features should be enabled or disabled in all build configurations so that your code behaves identically.

Reviewer 2: I think we should put the link to the trimming-related feature switches (https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/maui/deployment/trimming?view=net-maui-9.0&branch=pr-en-us-2579#trimming-feature-switches).
